Anna Mason's Final Project for IS 430, Foundations of Information Processesing
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Summer 2025
Instructor: Dr. Bradly Alicea

This program reads and conducts an analysis of a Library of Congress housed dataset. 

By the People campaign: Chicago 1977: People, Places, and Cultures
Number of transcriptions: 3,656
Dataset created: 2025-03-25

Location: https://www.loc.gov/item/2023514954
Zip file size: 1.6 MB

I. The Nature of the Dataset
The dataset is a list of every note-page that researchers created during the 1977 survey, each row being the identifier for that single page, the link to a scan of the page, and a few other datapoints.
The datapoints I was interested in were the transcription of the page and the tags of the page. The transcription and tags were generated by volunteers, and pulling up the dataset
you can see that these data are extremely inconsistent and non-standard. If I were to do this project again, I would have chosen a cleaner dataset. 

The project is standardized and describes what specific initiative the page belongs to within the folklife survey. 
This does not give any signifiers of which ethnic group the page pertains to or what aspect of life the researcher observed (ie. culinary, musical, religious etc)

The Transcription and Tag columns do sometimes detail the ethnic group and aspect of life, but sometimes/often are left blank.
The transcription and tag columns can also repeat words, meaning that if someone transcribed "irish", but also tagged the page as "irish", that word will appear twice in the same row.
This presents a problem later. I will detail this in section II. 

II. About this Program

My goal for this project was to create an interactive program where users could choose what sort of data analysis and visualizations they would like to see from this dataset.
I wanted this project to help prepare me for possible future work. I currently work in a public library but am interested in archives and special collections, and I can see a future in which an employer asks me to run a data analysis on a given collection. 
So I decided to find a publicly available archival collection in which I could run some sort of data analysis program on. 

What I will say is that I think I bit off more than I could chew, and, this dataset is extremely non-user friendly. These were my major two issues I ran into during this project.

This program is incomplete -- as of now, I don't think the program really gives any significant insights into the data. 
I don't see a future in which it can do that unless the dataset is more completely transcribed and tagged, and more consistent in its presentation. 

That being said, I learned more about how to use pandas and matplotlib, and I am glad that as it stands now, the program does not throw any errors.
I definitely referenced Stack Overflow and other blog discussions to learn how to format the counting and chart creation portions of the code. Once I saw how other people had manipulated data they 
read into their programs, I was able to take what was similar and adapt what was different for my own code. I also asked for help from some of my more experienced software friends -- they were able to 
give me pointers on how to structure the code and turn me away from routes they thought would be less successful. 

An example of this was when I was considering doing this project in a more Object Oriented Approach. This proved tricky because each page (i.e. row) is nested within a large series of organization
in that each page belongs in a book, which belongs in a folder, which belongs in a project etc. A friend reccomended doing a more data-forward approach, as this didn't actually seem to add to the legibility and 
organization of the data within the program. 

Overall, I think this was a good start to the project, but it still needs work and the underlying dataset needs a lot of work and cleaning. 

A learning process indeed!
